Adding support for default interface function members (#681)
dotnet/csharpstandard: standard/basic-concepts.md

- Each delegate declaration creates a new declaration space. Names are introduced into this declaration space through parameters (*fixed_parameter*s and *parameter_array*s) and *type_parameter*s.
- Each enumeration declaration creates a new declaration space. Names are introduced into this declaration space through *enum_member_declarations*.

> - Each method declaration, property declaration, property accessor declaration, indexer declaration, indexer accessor declaration, operator declaration, instance constructor declaration, anonymous function, and local function creates a new declaration space called a ***local variable declaration space***. Names are introduced into this declaration space through parameters (*fixed_parameter*s and *parameter_array*s) and *type_parameter*s. The set accessor for a property or an indexer introduces the name `value` as a parameter. The body of the function member, anonymous function, or local function, if any, is considered to be nested within the local variable declaration space. When a local variable declaration space and a nested local variable declaration space contain elements with the same name, within the scope of the nested local name, the outer local name is hidden ([§7.7.1](basic-concepts.md#771-general)) by the nested local name.

Reviewer: Comment for lines 271 & 405 – closest I can get with Github…

`protected` is discussed in terms of classes, it is applicable to interfaces and appears to mean accessible in derived interfaces. I haven't consider other accessibilities which might now be allowed.

Reviewer 2: Good catch. Note on the comment: an interface member with `protected` access can be overridden in a class or struct implementing that interface. But, not accessed.

Derived interfaces can access protected members defined in the base interface.

static protected members defined in an interface can be accessed by derived interfaces and implementing classes and structs.

The ***declared accessibility*** of a member can be one of the following:

- Public, which is selected by including a `public` modifier in the member declaration. The intuitive meaning of `public` is “access not limited”.

> - Protected, which is selected by including a `protected` modifier in the member declaration. The intuitive meaning of `protected` is “access limited to the containing type or types derived from the containing type”.

Reviewer: Is there a reason to use type rather than class/interface? (As structs are types and are not derived from)

Reviewer 2: I started with "class or interface", but then ended up with this hard to parse text. Happy for any wordsmithing that improves accuracy is doesn't have nested "or" lists.

```suggestion
- Protected, which is selected by including a `protected` modifier in the member declaration. The intuitive meaning of `protected` is “access limited to the containing class or interface, or classes or interfaces derived from the containing type”.
```

Reviewer 3: I'd personally prefer to stick to type here because it's simpler. Yes, you can't derive from a struct - but you can't derive from a sealed class either. Basically I think it all *works* with "containing type" so let's stick to the minimal number of concepts and let other bits of the spec deal with whether there can be a type derived from the containing type.

What's *not* clear from here is that it's the *program text* of the containing type - so if I have a nested type within the containing type, I get access to protected members. I don't think that's clear without being called out. (I thought we already had it, but apparently not...)

### 7.5.4 Protected access

> When a `protected` or `private protected` instance member is accessed outside the program text of the class in which it is declared, and when a `protected internal` instance member is accessed outside the program text of the program in which it is declared, the access shall take place within a class declaration that derives from the class in which it is declared. Furthermore, the access is required to take place *through* an instance of that derived class type or a class type constructed from it. This restriction prevents one derived class from accessing protected members of other derived classes, even when the members are inherited from the same base class. Instance interface members defined with `protected` or `private protected` access cannot be accessed from a `class` or `struct` that implements that interface; these can be accessed only from derived interfaces. However, `class` and `struct` types can override `protected` instance members declared in an interface it implements.

Reviewer: If the last sentence is to be part of the Standard, and not an artefact of some implementation that has crept in, I think it needs elaboration – the class/struct can override but not invoke? So who is being effected given this isn't an inheritance relationship?

Reviewer 4: The class/struct can't invoke directly, i.e. the interface member name is not available for lookup in the class/struct scope, and the class/struct can't simply cast `this` to the interface type and call the protected member because protected names arent available for lookup there either.

But if the class/struct itself, or anyone else, casts the class/struct to an interface type and calls a public interface member which has a DIM, that DIM may call the protected member, and this may invoke the class/struct implementation of the protected interface member.

Reviewer 2: @Nigel-Ecma  What do you think of turning Joseph's comment into an example? Would that satisfy your concerns?

Reviewer: @jnm2 – Bravo, taking a wrong turn along that route would be easy! 😉

Seriously, this surely modifies the C# protection model – where else can you override a member you cannot access?

To save us, a possibly fruitless, search for the design and/or use case documentation for this feature can you provide a link or two?

We need to know this is “by design”, and probably include an example as a reader thinking along the lines of the usual C# protection model might think they’ve misread this.

Or am I missing something obvious?

Reviewer: Due to timezones most of you are asleep and I’m filling in the end of the day… so I grabbed a few docs:

1. [default interface methods](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/proposals/csharp-8.0/default-interface-methods.md) – the proposal
2. [Issues in Default Interface Methods](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/issues/406) – open issues referenced by (1), since all closed
3. [default interface methods](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/proposals/csharp-8.0/default-interface-methods) – public version of (1) dated 8 Dec 2022 (so fairly recent)

(1) & (3) have 7 open issues, including:

> ***Open Issue:*** We need to specify the precise meaning of the access modifiers such as `protected` and `internal`, and which declarations do and do not override them (in a derived interface) or implement them (in a class that implements the interface).

They both also have an *Unresolved questions* section, including:

> The detailed specification must describe the resolution mechanism used at runtime to select the precise method to be invoked.

Finally they both have an *Overriding non-public interface members* section, including:

> You can only implement non-public interface members explicitly. (With ref to [LDM](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/master/meetings/2017/LDM-2017-04-18.md#dim-implementing-a-non-public-interface-member-not-in-list))

The added sentence above does nor mention explicitly.

This quick scan has left me with more questions, like are all the open issues resolved in this draft, and a hope someone has checked & resolved all this. Standards don’t have unresolved issues such as these.

Reviewer 2: I did more initial digging today. I think this has gone off the rails in part because we've been thinking of this in terms of deltas from what was allowed. It might be better to treat this with a holistic look at classes, interfaces, and structs:

First a correction:  Our recent discussions have added notes that a class can use implicit interface implementation for non-public interface methods. That's only true in C# 10 and later! I'll be making updates for that, and adding an HTML comment so we remember.

I think I can rework the rules along the following lines:

First, in member lookup (12.5). (Not standard language yet):

> If the receiver is a class or struct type, public members implemented by an implemented interface by not implicitly implemented by the class or base class are removed from the set.
> This rule includes `this`, meaning that the body of a class can't access members of an interface that are explicitly implemented. (Note that this is true prior to C# 8, but it's meaning now also includes all non-public interface members.

Next, as far as a class or struct implementing an interface member (updates to 19.6): (Yes, this also needs wordsmithing)

- A concrete class or struct must provide or inherit all members of all interfaces it implements (already a rule)
- `public` members of an interface may be implicitly or explicitly implemented by a class.
- A class, struct, or interface, may override any accessible member declared in an interface in inherits or implements.
- A non-public member of an interface must be explicitly implemented by a class or struct. (This restriction needs to be added in 19.6.3).
- A matching member that isn't an explicit implementation introduces a `new` method.

Reviewer 4: I see the term `override` showing up here again.

> When a `protected` or `private protected` instance member is accessed outside the program text of the class in which it is declared, and when a `protected internal` instance member is accessed outside the program text of the program in which it is declared, the access shall take place within a class declaration that derives from the class in which it is declared. Furthermore, the access is required to take place *through* an instance of that derived class type or a class type constructed from it. This restriction prevents one derived class from accessing protected members of other derived classes, even when the members are inherited from the same base class. Instance interface members defined with `protected` or `private protected` access cannot be accessed from a `class` or `struct` that implements that interface; these can be accessed only from derived interfaces. However, `class` and `struct` types can override `protected` instance members declared in an interface it implements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a `protected` or `private protected` instance member is accessed outside the program text of the class in which it is declared, and when a `protected internal` instance member is accessed outside the program text of the program in which it is declared, the access shall take place within a class declaration that derives from the class in which it is declared. Furthermore, the access is required to take place *through* an instance of that derived class type or a class type constructed from it. This restriction prevents one derived class from accessing protected members of other derived classes, even when the members are inherited from the same base class. Instance interface members defined with `protected` or `private protected` access cannot be accessed from a `class` or `struct` that implements that interface; these can be accessed only from derived interfaces. However, `class` and `struct` types can define overridden `protected` instance members declared in an interface it implements.
```

Reviewer 4: @BillWagner I think this is "**can implement** protected instance members declared in an interface" instead of "**can define overridden**" since we're not using the word "override" to describe providing a more specific implementation.

Reviewer 4: It's probably also worth not just saying "can implement," but more precisely "can explicitly implement"; implicit implementation of nonpublic interface members is not allowed until C# 10.

Name hiding through inheritance occurs when classes or structs redeclare names that were inherited from base classes. This type of name hiding takes one of the following forms:

- A constant, field, property, event, or type introduced in a class, interface, or struct hides all base class members with the same name.
- A method introduced in a class, interface, or struct hides all non-method base class members with the same name, and all base class methods with the same signature ([§7.6](basic-concepts.md#76-signatures-and-overloading)).

> - An indexer introduced in a class, interface, or struct hides all base class indexers with the same signature ([§7.6](basic-concepts.md#76-signatures-and-overloading)) .

Reviewer: The changes here give interfaces a *base class*. §12.5.2 *Base types* defines the *base types* of an interface as the base interfaces and the class type `object`. Is *base class* for an interface defined somewhere else or are we assuming this covers it?

`R₀` is determined as follows:

- If `x` is zero and the *namespace_or_type_name* appears within a generic method declaration ([§15.6](classes.md#156-methods)) but outside the *attributes* of its *method-header*, and if that declaration includes a type parameter ([§15.2.3](classes.md#1523-type-parameters)) with name `I`, then `R₀` refers to that type parameter.
- Otherwise, if the *namespace_or_type_name* appears within a type declaration, then for each instance type `T` ([§15.3.2](classes.md#1532-the-instance-type)), starting with the instance type of that type declaration and continuing with the instance type of each enclosing class, struct, or interface declaration (if any):
  - If `x` is zero and the declaration of `T` includes a type parameter with name `I`, then `R₀` refers to that type parameter.

>   - Otherwise, if the *namespace_or_type_name* appears within the body of the type declaration, and `T` or any of its base types contain a nested accessible type having name `I` and `x` type parameters, then `R₀` refers to that type constructed with the given type arguments. If there is more than one such type, the type declared within the more derived type is selected.

Reviewer: Can there now not be “more than one such type” yet neither is ”more derived”, so the result is ambiguous? Is this already covered somewhere as there has always been “multiple inheritance” via interfaces?

Scenario:

```csharp
interface A
{
    public class NestedClass { public static void Hello() => …; }
}
interface B
{
    public class NestedClass { public static void Hello() => …; }
}
interface C: A, B
{
    public class Nested
    {
        public void Test() { NestedClass.Hello(); }
    }
}
```

Reviewer 2: Updated to say this is an error

`R₀` is determined as follows:

- If `x` is zero and the *namespace_or_type_name* appears within a generic method declaration ([§15.6](classes.md#156-methods)) but outside the *attributes* of its *method-header*, and if that declaration includes a type parameter ([§15.2.3](classes.md#1523-type-parameters)) with name `I`, then `R₀` refers to that type parameter.
- Otherwise, if the *namespace_or_type_name* appears within a type declaration, then for each instance type `T` ([§15.3.2](classes.md#1532-the-instance-type)), starting with the instance type of that type declaration and continuing with the instance type of each enclosing class, struct, or interface declaration (if any):
  - If `x` is zero and the declaration of `T` includes a type parameter with name `I`, then `R₀` refers to that type parameter.

>   - Otherwise, if the *namespace_or_type_name* appears within the body of the type declaration, and `T` or any of its base types contain a nested accessible type having name `I` and `x` type parameters, then `R₀` refers to that type constructed with the given type arguments. If there is more than one such type, the type declared within the more derived type is selected. It is a compiler error if no type is more derived than all others, as in the case if nested types declared in multiple interfaces.

Reviewer: The “, as in the case if nested types declared in multiple interfaces” doesn’t make sense as is – it has to be types with the same name, and is an example so I think should be marked as such.

Reviewer 2: Removed that phrase, and added an example.

- If `x` is zero and `Rₚ` refers to a namespace and `Rₚ` contains a nested namespace with name `I`, then `Rₙ` refers to that nested namespace.
- Otherwise, if `Rₚ` refers to a namespace and `Rₚ` contains an accessible type having name `I` and `x` type parameters, then `Rₙ` refers to that type constructed with the given type arguments.

> - Otherwise, if `Rₚ` refers to a (possibly constructed) class, struct, or interface type and `Rₚ` or any of its base classes contain a nested accessible type having name `I` and `x` type parameters, then `Rₙ` refers to that type constructed with the given type arguments. If there is more than one such type, the type declared within the more derived type is selected.

Reviewer: See comments on lines 786 & 918 – here we have base classes & most derived

Reviewer 2: Updated in both intstances.

> - Otherwise, if `Rₚ` refers to a (possibly constructed) class, struct, or interface type and `Rₚ` or any of its base types contain a nested accessible type having name `I` and `x` type parameters, then `Rₙ` refers to that type constructed with the given type arguments. If there is more than one such type, the type declared within the more derived type is selected. It is a compiler error if no type is more derived than all others, as in the case if nested types declared in multiple interfaces.

Reviewer: See comment on line 918

Reviewer 2: Same fix as line 918.
